---
layout: post
title: HEY
date: 2020-10-19 09:54 +0300
tags:
- Meta
---

That's going to be one really short post.  I just wanted to share with
you that I've been using [HEY](https://hey.com/) (a new e-mail service
from Basecamp) for the past few months and overall I'm quite happy
with it. This article is not a review of HEY, it's more an
announcement that now you can reach me at `myfirstname@hey.com` if you're into
e-mail.[^1]

I'll keep my `@batsov.com` e-mail backed by GMail for the time being,
as I didn't really have any fundamental issues with GMail, other than
my dislike for Google's (mis)handling of private data. That being
said, I want to expand my usage of HEY going forward. I've already
moved there all my newsletter subscriptions, as HEY has great support
for newsletter, and I've also been trying to have most of my conversations
with people over HEY as well. To help with this I've updated most public
mentions of my e-mail (e.g. on GitHub) to point to the new HEY-powered address.

HEY is definitely not perfect (e.g. the message editor feels inferior to what you get in GMail, and the same goes for
search functionality), but I love the philosophy of the service and I'm always open to trying new ideas and workflows.
I hope that down the road I'll manage to break free from the grip of Google and leave GMail for good,
but that mostly depends on how HEY will evolve and how well will I adapt to using it.
In the mean time - I'm looking forward to chatting with more of you over HEY!

[^1]: I hope it's clear that you have to replace `myfirstname` with my real first name. :D
