---
title: Perl Turns 34
date: 2021-12-19 19:52 +0200
link: https://github.com/Perl/perl5/commit/8d063cd8450e59ea1c611a2f4f5a21059a2804f1
tags:
- Perl
---

On Dec 18th, 2021, Perl turned 34! Here's how it all started:

> **a "replacement" for awk and sed**
>
> [  Perl is kind of designed to make awk and sed semi-obsolete.  This posting
> will include the first 10 patches after the main source.  The following
> description is lifted from Larry's manpage. --r$  ]
>
> Perl is a interpreted language optimized for scanning arbitrary text
> files, extracting information from those text files, and printing
> reports based on that information.  It's also a good language for many
> system management tasks.  The language is intended to be practical
> (easy to use, efficient, complete) rather than beautiful (tiny,
> elegant, minimal).  It combines (in the author's opinion, anyway) some
> of the best features of C, sed, awk, and sh, so people familiar with
> those languages should have little difficulty with it.  (Language
> historians will also note some vestiges of csh, Pascal, and even
> BASIC-PLUS.) Expression syntax corresponds quite closely to C
> expression syntax.  If you have a problem that would ordinarily use sed
> or awk or sh, but it exceeds their capabilities or must run a little
> faster, and you don't want to write the silly thing in C, then perl may
> be for you.  There are also translators to turn your sed and awk
> scripts into perl scripts.

Perl has a very special place in my heart, as it was one of the first programming languages that I learned in the early days of my career. In 2005 I was even teaching Perl to students at the Technical University of Sofia, which was my very first experience as an educator. Perl taught me a lot about the virtues of programming, text processing, regular expressions, scripting and writing unreadable code. I wouldn't be the same programmer (person?) without it!

I still remember fondly the days when web development was all about CGI and Perl!
While the language lost traction in recent years, I think that its legacy in alive and well - most notably as a replacement for `sed` and `awk`, and in Ruby.[^1] Happy birthday, Perl!

[^1]: Not to mention the countless other programming languages that have modeled their regular expression support after Perl.
