---
title: OCaml's Standard Library (`Stdlib`)
date: 2025-03-14 11:18 +0200
tags:
- OCaml
- Learning OCaml
---

Every programming language comes with some "batteries" included -
mostly in the form of its standard library. That's typically all
of the functionality that's available out-of-the-box, without the need
to install additional libraries. (although the definition varies from
language to language) Usually standard libraries are pretty similar,
but I think that OCaml's a bit "weird" and slightly confusing in some
regards, so I decided to write down a few thoughts on it and how to
make the best of it.

OCaml's standard library is called `Stdlib` and it's the source of much
"controversy" in the OCaml community. Historically `Stdlib` was focused only the
needs of the OCaml compiler (many people called it "the compiler library" for
that reason) and it was very basic when it comes to the functionality that it
provided.  This is part of the reason why libraries like Jane Street's `Base`
and `Core` (alternatives to `Stdlib`), and `CCContainers` (complementary
extensions to `Stdlib`) become so popular in the OCaml community.

From what I gathered, the compiler authors felt it was the responsibility of the
users of the language to find (or create) the right libraries for their
use-cases and preferred to keep the standard library as lean as possible.  I get
their reasoning, but I think this backfired to some extent, as it's not
something that many newcomers to a language would expect. The standard library
was definitely a point of surprise and disappointment for me when playing with
OCaml for the first time. I still remember how surprised I was that the book
[Real World OCaml](https://dev.realworldocaml.org/) began with the instructions
to replace the built-in standard library with the more full-featured `Base` and
`Core` libraries. I was used to fairly minimal standard library from my time
with Clojure, but OCaml really outdid Clojure in this regard!

These days, however, I've noticed an increased focus on aligning the `Stdlib`
functionality with the expectations of most programmers. That's obvious when you
check the recent OCaml releases, that feature many additions to it:

- [OCaml 5.0](https://ocaml.org/releases/5.0.0#standard-library)
- [OCaml 5.1](https://ocaml.org/releases/5.1.0#standard-library)
- [OCaml 5.2](https://ocaml.org/releases/5.2.0#standard-library)
- [OCaml 5.3](https://ocaml.org/releases/5.3.0#standard-library): Around 20 new functions in the standard library (in the `Domain`, `Dynarray`, `Format`, `List`, `Queue`, `Sys`, and `Uchar` modules).

I think this trend started somewhere around OCaml 4.10 and has accelerated recently.
I've written about some of those additions in the past - e.g. [`List.take` and `List.drop`]({% post_url 2024-02-23-ocaml-adds-list-take-and-list-drop %}) and I think they'll be
quite helpful to newcomers in the language.

## Exploring Stdlib

The [`Stdlib` module](https://ocaml.org/manual/5.3/api/Stdlib.html) is
automatically opened at the beginning of each compilation. All components of
this module can therefore be referred by their short name, without prefixing
them by `Stdlib`.

In particular, it provides the basic operations over the built-in types
(numbers, booleans, byte sequences, strings, exceptions, references, lists,
arrays, input-output channels, ...) and the standard library modules.
In OCaml 5.3 `Stdlib` consists of the following sub-modules:

- `Arg`: parsing of command line arguments
- `Array`: array operations
- `ArrayLabels`: array operations (with labels)
- `Atomic`: atomic references
- `Bigarray`: large, multi-dimensional, numerical arrays
- `Bool`: boolean values
- `Buffer`: extensible buffers
- `Bytes`: byte sequences
- `BytesLabels`: byte sequences (with labels)
- `Callback`: registering OCaml values with the C runtime
- `Char`: character operations
- `Complex`: complex numbers
- `Condition`: condition variables to synchronize between threads
- `Domain`: Domain spawn/join and domain local variables
- `Digest`: MD5 message digest
- `Dynarray`: Dynamic arrays
- `Effect`: deep and shallow effect handlers
- `Either`: either values
- `Ephemeron`: Ephemerons and weak hash table
- `Filename`: operations on file names
- `Float`: floating-point numbers
- `Format`: pretty printing
- `Fun`: function values
- `Gc`: memory management control and statistics; finalized values
- `Hashtbl`: hash tables and hash functions
- `In_channel`: input channels
- `Int`: integers
- `Int32`: 32-bit integers
- `Int64`: 64-bit integers
- `Lazy`: deferred computations
- `Lexing`: the run-time library for lexers generated by ocamllex
- `List`: list operations
- `ListLabels`: list operations (with labels)
- `Map`: association tables over ordered types
- `Marshal`: marshaling of data structures
- `MoreLabels`: include modules Hashtbl, Map and Set with labels
- `Mutex`: locks for mutual exclusion
- `Nativeint`: processor-native integers
- `Oo`: object-oriented extension
- `Option`: option values
- `Out_channel`: output channels
- `Parsing`: the run-time library for parsers generated by ocamlyacc
- `Printexc`: facilities for printing exceptions
- `Printf`: formatting printing functions
- `Queue`: first-in first-out queues
- `Random`: pseudo-random number generator (PRNG)
- `Result`: result values
- `Scanf`: formatted input functions
- `Seq`: functional iterators
- `Set`: sets over ordered types
- `Semaphore`: semaphores, another thread synchronization mechanism
- `Stack`: last-in first-out stacks
- `StdLabels`: include modules Array, List and String with labels
- `String`: string operations
- `StringLabels`: string operations (with labels)
- `Sys`: system interface
- `Type`: type introspection
- `Uchar`: Unicode characters
- `Unit`: unit values
- `Weak`: arrays of weak pointers

Lots of good stuff here! Sure, it's not anything like the standard libraries of
languages like `Ruby`, `Python` or `Java`, but you have the basics covered, at
least to some extent. One thing I found somewhat peculiar at first was the presence
of two versions of some modules - e.g. `List` and `ListLabels`. Both of them
have the same functions, but the `ListLabels` module makes heavy of use of
labeled parameters. I'm not sure what's the reasoning behind this, but I'm
guessing this was influenced by the `Base` library, that's using labels
everywhere pervasively. Here'a few examples:

``` ocaml
(* Using List module *)
let squares_list = List.map (fun x -> x * x) [1; 2; 3; 4; 5]
(* Result: [1; 4; 9; 16; 25] *)

(* Using ListLabels module *)
let squares_list_labels = ListLabels.map [1; 2; 3; 4; 5] ~f:(fun x -> x * x)
(* Result: [1; 4; 9; 16; 25] *)

(* Using List module *)
let sum_list = List.fold_left (+) 0 [1; 2; 3; 4; 5]
(* Result: 15 *)

(* Using ListLabels module *)
let sum_list_labels = ListLabels.fold_left [1; 2; 3; 4; 5] ~init:0 ~f:(+)
(* Result: 15 *)
```

The labeled arguments in `ListLabels` make it clear what each parameter means -
e.g. `~init` for the initial value and `~f` for the folding function. I'm not
sure how I feel about labeled arguments in general, as in most cases I don't
think they are really needed, but you've got the option if you want it.

One notable omission from `Stdlib` is some module for dealing with regular
expressions. OCaml bundles the (controversial)
[str](https://ocaml.org/manual/5.3/libstr.html) module, but it's not part of
`Stdlib` and you have to link it to your applications manually:

``` shell
ocamlc other options -I +str str.cma other files
ocamlopt other options  -I +str str.cmxa other files
```

Not to mention that you probably want to use something different instead. (e.g. `re`)

**Note:** The [documentation of
`Stdlib`](https://ocaml.org/manual/5.3/stdlib.html) is excellent and I highly
recommend everyone to peruse it.

## A note about the core library

Sometimes you might hear mentions of OCaml's "core library" (not to be confused
with `Core` by Jane Street) and you might wonder what's that exactly.

Well, the "core library" is composed of declarations for built-in types and
exceptions, plus the module Stdlib that provides basic operations on these
built-in types.

You can learn more about the core library [here](https://ocaml.org/manual/5.3/core.html).

## A note about `Pervasives`

Early on in my OCaml journey I'd find references here and there to a library
named `Pervasives`, that sounded more or less like a standard library.
Turns out that `Pervasives` got renamed to `Stdlib` in OCaml 4.07.

## Epilogue

OCaml's `Stdlib` is often cited as a reason why the language is not popular, and
I think that's a valid argument. Still, it seems to me that lately `Stdlib` has
been moving in the right direction, and the out-of-the-box OCaml experience got
improved because of this. I can only hope that this trend will continue and that
as a result OCaml will become more beginner-friendly and more useful out-of-the-box.

That's all I have for you today. Keep hacking!
